Bone-tipped arrows are from the Southern Highlands and have a round 
palmwood foreshaft, incised and painted red and white with a human 
bone tip.  These arrows are particularly feared, as the human bone was 
known to cause an almost certainly fatal infection if any fragment 
remained in the wound.    
FORWARD - What is this website about?
In this web site are words.   They are the words of Mrs. Ruth Wagner who 
describes the fourteen years [1955 to 1969] she and her husband, 
Reverend William P. Wagner, spent as a missionary team in the highlands 
of New Guinea.  In 1955, William P. Wagner [Bill for short], a 34-year old 
Lutheran Church - Missouri Synod Springfield, Illinois, seminary graduate, 
and his bride, Ruth, a former public school teacher in Toledo, Ohio, 
willingly left the United States to set foot in a new land.  Only nine other 
missionaries had been there before them.
As she relates her story, Mrs. Ruth Wagner shares her memories, 
thoughts, feelings; many photographs, films, conference papers, and 
mission newsletters describing their encounters with the Enga, Hewa, and 
Duna people of New Guinea.  As much as I have tried to put her story 
into a respectable format, so that she could share this knowledge with 
the world, I am fully aware that I cannot possibly capture all the verve 
and excitement this journey created.  However, I hope I did it justice.  
To fully enjoy this web book, photos and maps can expand and return to 
normal size by simply "clicking" on them.  The film and audio clips 
complement the Wagner story, and are accessed in the same manner.  
The conference papers, mission newsletters, photos, and films used to 
create this website were all donated by Mrs. Ruth Wagner, unless cited 
otherwise.  The complete collection is available for viewing on DVD media 
at the Neff Hall Anthropology Library, the Lowell D. Holmes Museum of 
Anthropology in Neff Hall on the Wichita State University Campus, or at 
the Wichita State University Library in the Special Collections department.
Enjoy!  
Next
