The Lutherans in New Guinea
German missionaries of the Neuendettelsau and Rhenish missions 
began the work in 1886, entering at two points on the north coast of 
what was then the new German colony of East New Guinea. The 
inhabitants, Melanesians and Papuans by race, were considered 
primitive.  Today in unexplored pockets in the inland mountains, there 
still live some of the most primitive people on earth; of all the mission 
fields of Asia this is the one where Western civilization has been the 
last to come.  The land is mountainous, forested and as might be 
expected, thinly populated.  The missionaries faced a tremendous 
problem of language.  In 1957, the half a million people populating 
the area of the Lutheran church were divided into sixty or eighty 
tribes and spoke as many different tongues.  During that time, in a 
single church district of 8,000 people four languages are used.  None 
of these languages had ever been put into writing.  The missionaries 
chose three of the principal languages as “church languages” and 
used them and interpreters for their work, adding “pidgin” which is an 
adaptation of English.   
The story of the development leading up to the remarkable 
organization that is the Lutheran Mission New Guinea has a dramatic 
history of missionary vision and loyalty, of the bond of faith bringing 
aid in the emergencies caused by two world wars, and of the final 
union in 1953 of German (Neuendettelsau), Australian (UELCA),  and 
the American (ALC, which replaced the Rhenish Mission) missions into 
a single internationally staffed and financed (with substantial 
subsidies from the LWF) organization.  It was equipped as never 
before to carry on in times that was critical for the development of 
the New Guinean people and for the church.  
3
Cont'd
There were two rooms in the Bush house, each 15’ x 15’, of which one 
was their bedroom.  This room was also a semi-storage room and 
contained a shower.  The shower was a converted milking bucket with a 
hose attached underneath, resembling a sprinkler can, and manipulated 
up and down by means of a rope and pulley.  Water was heated on the 
stove and brought to the bathroom.
The other room, a kitchen, contained a food-safe for the storage of food, 
which was partly enclosed by a screen. There was a cabinet similar to a 
buffet with two drawers on top and two large doors with shelves inside, a 
6’ x 42” table which could easily accomodate ten people, four chairs, the 
wood stove and firewood box, a counter and shelves along one side, a 
shelf for holding the water buckets, plus odds-and-ends in corners and 
various articles hanging on the walls.  
The ceiling in the house had large strips of waterproof tar paper nailed to 
saplings, with the paper extending from one end of the house to the 
other.  This ceiling afforded a catch-all for fragments from the saplings 
above dropping onto the table, food, bed, etc.  The walls were two [2] 
layers of blind with kunai grass in between as insulation in which small 
rats scurried up and down and also under the Wagners' bed.  Mouse traps 
were not strong enough to catch these rats.  Reverend William Wagner 
used a hammer at night; he learned to be quick getting out of bed.   Rats 
were frequent visitors in all bush houses, and cats were also very helpful 
to keep down their population [Wagner Oral Slide History].  
Next
