The Lutherans in New Guinea
German missionaries of the Neuendettelsau and Rhenish missions 
began the work in 1886, entering at two points on the north coast of 
what was then the new German colony of East New Guinea. The 
inhabitants, Melanesians and Papuans by race, were considered 
primitive.  Today in unexplored pockets in the inland mountains, there 
still live some of the most primitive people on earth; of all the mission 
fields of Asia this is the one where Western civilization has been the 
last to come.  The land is mountainous, forested and as might be 
expected, thinly populated.  The missionaries faced a tremendous 
problem of language.  In 1957, the half a million people populating 
the area of the Lutheran church were divided into sixty or eighty 
tribes and spoke as many different tongues.  During that time, in a 
single church district of 8,000 people four languages are used.  None 
of these languages had ever been put into writing.  The missionaries 
chose three of the principal languages as “church languages” and 
used them and interpreters for their work, adding “pidgin” which is an 
adaptation of English.   
The story of the development leading up to the remarkable 
organization that is the Lutheran Mission New Guinea has a dramatic 
history of missionary vision and loyalty, of the bond of faith bringing 
aid in the emergencies caused by two world wars, and of the final 
union in 1953 of German (Neuendettelsau), Australian (UELCA),  and 
the American (ALC, which replaced the Rhenish Mission) missions into 
a single internationally staffed and financed (with substantial 
subsidies from the LWF) organization.  It was equipped as never 
before to carry on in times that was critical for the development of 
the New Guinean people and for the church.  
3
Sarah, shown with her mother, Ruth, was born at Jagaum Lutheran 
Hospital near Madang – which is on the New Guinean coast.  Mrs. Ruth 
Wagner went there because the hospital in their mission circuit was still 
under construction.  Ruth and baby Sarah flew back from the coastal 
hospital to the government airstrip and station at Wapenamada, where 
they took the mission Landrover to Mambisanda and waited for Reverend 
Wagner to arrive.  They then would head back to their home at Raiakama, 
in the Saka Valley.
RAISING A FAMILY – In New Guinea
Next
“Bill saw Sarah for the first time that same morning they left for 
Saka Laiagam, with Reverend Bill walking and Ruth in a chair 
carried by Engas as she was not allowed to climb up and down 
cliff sides and valleys.  Sarah wrapped in blankets and lying on a 
“turi” in her “bilum”, traveling Enga fashion on the back of our 
houseboy” [Wagner Newsletter, Dec 1955].  
Sarah is the Reverend and Mrs. Wagner’s first child; she was born in New 
Guinea.  Throughout the couple’s fourteen years with the Enga, Duna, 
and Hewa people, the Wagners had five beautiful daughters; Sarah, 
Jennifer, Stephanie, Lisa, and Kristen; all were born in New Guinea. 
Being a new mother was always a learning experience, but caring for a 
new baby in New Guinea with just the barest of essentials needed to care 
for her was difficult, and had, of course, changed the couple’s daily 
routine.   Washing was now done at least three times a week, two baby 
washes were boiled in the copper outside, and one washed with the 
regular wash.  
