The Lutherans in New Guinea
German missionaries of the Neuendettelsau and Rhenish missions 
began the work in 1886, entering at two points on the north coast of 
what was then the new German colony of East New Guinea. The 
inhabitants, Melanesians and Papuans by race, were considered 
primitive.  Today in unexplored pockets in the inland mountains, there 
still live some of the most primitive people on earth; of all the mission 
fields of Asia this is the one where Western civilization has been the 
last to come.  The land is mountainous, forested and as might be 
expected, thinly populated.  The missionaries faced a tremendous 
problem of language.  In 1957, the half a million people populating 
the area of the Lutheran church were divided into sixty or eighty 
tribes and spoke as many different tongues.  During that time, in a 
single church district of 8,000 people four languages are used.  None 
of these languages had ever been put into writing.  The missionaries 
chose three of the principal languages as “church languages” and 
used them and interpreters for their work, adding “pidgin” which is an 
adaptation of English.   
The story of the development leading up to the remarkable 
organization that is the Lutheran Mission New Guinea has a dramatic 
history of missionary vision and loyalty, of the bond of faith bringing 
aid in the emergencies caused by two world wars, and of the final 
union in 1953 of German (Neuendettelsau), Australian (UELCA),  and 
the American (ALC, which replaced the Rhenish Mission) missions into 
a single internationally staffed and financed (with substantial 
subsidies from the LWF) organization.  It was equipped as never 
before to carry on in times that was critical for the development of 
the New Guinean people and for the church.  
3
Click HERE to hear Mrs. Wagner
Cont'd                          Skills & Handicrafts
Bows, arrows, spears, bracelets, holders for the cigarettes they roll, 
seeded and feather headdresses,  Sing Sing head dresses with Bird of 
Paradise plumes, string belts, water gourds, an instrument similar to a 
jew’s harp which is made of bamboo, a flute made from wild cane, and 
their clothing are handicrafts enjoyed by many.  The Enga have no art 
such as painting or sculpture. 
Next
