Click 
HERE 
to hear 
Mrs. 
Wagner
Highland Kuta or Reed Skirt
Western Highland Provinces, New Guinea, c. 1960
[4] Skirts, kuta; Kuni reed, woven grass rope, cloth, maker unknown
[2] Adult, Female; [2] Child, Female
Accession Numer:  2006.02.010
Description:  Light colored kuni grass tied on to plant fiber string cloth 
squares; attached over long part of skirt-tie of cloth on plant fiber strings.  
L 14" & 24" x W 2" & 9"
Accession Number:  2006.02.011
Description:  Light color tan, female child's kuni grass skirt, attached to 
cloth strip; short end of skirt has a loop made of wrapped kuni grass to tie 
around waist.  L 15" & 11" x 40"
Next
Accession Number:  2006.02.054
Description:  Light color tan, female 
child's kuni grass skirt, attached to cloth 
strip; short end of skirt has a loop made 
of wrapped kuni grass to tie around waist.  
L 16" & 8" x W 25"
Accession Number:  2006.02.055
Description: Light tan grass attached to a 
strip of blue cloth; worn by females. 
L 16.75" & 12" x W 35"
This station in Yaramanda was the home of Missionary Otto Hintze, one 
of the first missionaries in the Highlands, who was in charge of this 
circuit.
Yaramanda would be the Wagner’s home for the next two months, until 
they would continue on to Saka Raiakama to begin a new main station 
and a circuit of their own.  
 
 “This little grass house (below) is in Yaramanda, that is the first, that's 
where we came to when we came into the Highlands. and a.. Yaramanda 
was or is ahh.. a Mission station that was practically the second station 
that was ... umm.. started there in the Enga territory.. Otto Hintze was 
there, that would have been 1948, 1949, when he was there…so you are 
looking out over the valley and the Lai River is there.. This is the gorge 
for the Lai River”   
“This little grass house (left) is 
called ‘Strackman’s House” 
and Bill and I lived here before 
we went to Saka Raikama.  
When we arrived in New 
Guinea, we stayed with the 
Hintze family.  This picture 
was taken at their station in 
Yaramanda. We stayed there 
with them, ate there, had our 
bible study, wonderful 
conversations, and 
on Sunday, played games. This little grass house is where we slept 
because at that time, there were no facilities for other families in theirs.  
We just slept there.  The building off to the side is one of Otto's 
'Mitianda’  (on the right) It would be where he had church service.” 
  
(Ruth Wagner; slide  video)                                                                                                         
[Picture Courtesy of Mrs. Ruth Wagner]  
8
